mine reading you've seen this in sci-fi
movies machines in the future that can
read our thoughts however there are
devices today that can read the
electrical activity from our brains we
call this the EEG is there information
contained in these brainwaves and if so
could we train a computer to read our
thoughts my buddy Nathan has been
working to hack the EEG to build a
mind-reading machine so this is how the
EEG works inside your head is a brain
and that brain is made out of billions
of neurons each of those neurons send an
electrical message to each other now
these small messages can combine to make
an electrical wave that we could detect
on a monitor now traditionally the EEG
can tell us large-scale things for
example if you're asleep or if you're
alert but could tell us anything else
they actually read our thoughts we're
gonna test this we're not gonna start
with some complex thoughts we're gonna
do something very simple can we
interpret what someone is seen using
only their brainwaves Nathan's gonna
begin by placing electrodes on Christy's
head my life is tangled and then he's
going to show her a bunch of pictures
from four different categories face
house scenario and marriage pictures as
we show Kristy hundreds of these images
we are also capturing the electrical
waves on to Nathan's computer we want to
see if we can detect any visual
information about the photos contained
in the brain waves so when we're done
we're gonna see if the EEG can tell us
what kind of picture Christy is looking
at and if it does each category should
trigger a different brain signal okay so
we collected all the raw EEG data and
this is what we got it all looks pretty
messy so let's arrange them by picture
now still a bit too noisy to see any
differences but if we average the EEG
across all image types by aligning them
to when the image first appeared we can
remove this noise and pretty soon we can
see some dominant patterns emerge for
each category now the signals all still
look pretty similar let's take a closer
look about a hundred milliseconds after
the image comes on we see a positive
bump in all four cases we call this the
p100 what we think that is is what
happens in your brain when you recognize
an object but damn look at that signal
for the face it looks different than the
others there's a negative
dip about a hundred and seventy
milliseconds after the image comes on
what could be going on here research
shows that our brain has a lot of
neurons that are dedicated to
recognizing human faces
so this n170 splay could be all those
neurons firing at once in the same
location you can detect that in the EEG
so there are two takeaways here one our
eyes can't really detect the differences
in patterns without averaging out the
noise and two even after removing the
noise our eyes can only pick up the
signals associated with faces so this is
where we turn to machine learning
now our eyes are not very good at
picking up patterns and noisy data but
machine learning algorithms are designed
to do just that
so can we take a lot of pictures and a
lot of data and feed it in and train a
computer to be able to interpret what
Kristi's looking at in real time we're
trying to decode the information that's
coming out of her her EEG in real-time
and predict what it is that her eyes are
looking at and if it works what we
should see is every time that sure gives
a picture of scenery it should say
scenery scenery scenery scenery a face
face face face face but it's not quite
working that way is what we're
discovering we need a new career I think
ok so that was a massive failure but
we're still curious how far can we push
this technology and we look back at what
we did we noticed that the data was
coming into our computer very quickly
without any timing of when the images
came on and that's the equivalent of
reading a very long sentence without
spaces between the words something like
that would be hard to read but once we
add the spaces individual words appear
and it becomes a lot more understandable
but what if we cheat a little bit by
using a sensor we can tell the computer
where the image first appears that way
the brain wave stopped being a
continuous stream of information and
instead become individual packets of
meaning also we're gonna cheat a little
bit more by eliminating the categories -
- let's see if we can do some real-time
mind-reading in this new experiment
we're gonna sort of constrict it a
little bit more so that we know the
onset of the image and we're going to
limit the categories to face
scenery face correct scenery correct so
right now every time the image comes on
right we're taking a picture of the odds
of the image and decoding the EOG is
getting correct yes
faces there is information in the EEG
signal which is cool we just headed
aligned into the onset of the image
scenery correct face what this means
that there is some information there so
we can tell if we know that at what time
the picture came on we can tell what
type of picture it was possibly at least
on average by looking at the looking at
these evoke potentials exactly now if
you would have told me at the beginning
of this project this was possible I
would have said no way I literally did
not think he could do this did our
mind-reading experiment really work yes
but we had to do a lot of cheating now
it turns out you can't find some
interesting things in the EEG for
example if you're looking at someone's
face but it does have a lot of
limitations
perhaps advances in machine learning
will make huge strides and one day we'll
be able to decode what's going on our
thoughts but for now the next time a
company says that they can harness your
brainwaves to be able to control devices
it is your right it is your duty to be
skeptical
[Music]